pgen theory of operations

This document covers the first article pgen, before advanced optimizations are
added. The final version of this will be inserted into the Pascal-P6 document.

pgen is built on the pint assembler portion. This means that pgen is pint, but
without machine simulation. It generates assembly files for gcc/gas to be 
directly executed. 

pgen constructs expression trees, but not full graphs of the intermediate 
langauge. This means that intermediates are classified into three kinds:

1. Terminals, or operations that many consume zero or more expression trees, and
don't generate results used elsewhere.

2. Expression operators, which have one or more branches that are also 
expressions.

3. Leaves, which have no subexpressions.

All of these intermediate types are represented in the "assemble" level, and 
(as in pint) all of the intermediates are represented in a case statement.

The job of an entry in assemble can be broken into three parts:

1. Read the intermediate instruction and parameters. This includes, or may
include, p, one more more q parameters, labels, etc.

2. Construct expression trees as required.

3. Generate terminal code.

2 and 3 may or may not exist in assemble. However, it is considered "good form"
to structure each case handler in that order.

The first part, reading of intermediate, starts at the top of the case 
statement, and assemble gives the preamble of intermediate instruction prints.
The intermediate is copied to the output as assembler comments. In addition,
pgen dumps expression trees as assembler comments as well. The idea is that
the intermediate gives a single reference for how the code is constructed in
terms of comments in the assembler file.

The intermediate instruction is read as numbers and possibily a label. The reads
are written out, the label found with labelsearch routine is output. Then ends 
when the line is terminated. At that point, the p parameter and some number of q
parameters are loaded. These are either used directly in the handler if it is a
terminal, or else the getexp() routine places them into an expression tree
entry.

Expression trees are constructed by a sequence (typical) of:

getexp(ep)
popstk(ep^.r);
popstk(ep^.l);
pshstk(ep);

For a binary operator. So first an expression node is created with getexp(), and
the parameters are written (implicitly) to the entry, then some number of stacked
expression entries are placed in forks of the expression entry, then the new
entry is pushed. This is a pretty standard methodology to construct a tree using
a stack. The stack is just a series of linked expression nodes, and once the
expression tree is constructed, the stack is no longer used.

Each expression node has a left and right fork, and a number of "extra" entries
as required for complex nodes. If the operator is unary, it only uses the left
fork. Binaries use left and right forks. Intermediates that are leaves don't use
any forks.

Once the expression tree is built, and the terminal handler has all needed 
trees, the code generation can proceed. The first part is to perform register
assignment on expression trees. The register assignment sets one or two
registers in the root entry for each expression tree, r1 and r2. Most operations
yield only one register and one result, but two registers may be required for
things like "fat" pointers (base address and length/template pointer).

The next phase is each expression tree is processed with:

dmptrel();
genexp();

dmptrel() dumps the expression tree, formatted, into the assembly file as 
comments. This is a full tree dump including registers. The genexp() call then 
generates the code to process the expression. These two operations are 
interleaved until all of the expression trees needed are generated.

At this point, all of the operands generated by expressions are resident in
their assigned registers. The terminal handler then generates the final code for
the terminal intermediate.

Finally, the expression trees are torn down and recycled using detre(). pgen
uses a closed recycle. Once an expression entry is created, it stays allocated,
going back to the free list after use.

The wrtins() macro processor

To simplify the code generation, a macro line processor is used. The idea is
that the string will look like the final generated assembly language line that
is emitted:

wrtins20('movq $0,%rax        ', ep^.p, 0, rgnull, rgnull);

The wrtins() routine processes several macros embedded in the line:

$0, $1   - Selects either the first or second constant number.
%1, %2 - Selects either the first or second register.
+0, +1   - Selects either the first or second constant number.
$s       - Selects a symbol name as constant

These are formats used in the AMD64 instruction set for GCC/GAS.

The macro processor automatically tabs the input instruction to form the output.
The first word is tabbed by 8 spaces, and each subsequent space is tabbed to the
next 8 spaces.

The macro processor only recognizes exact formats and numbers, and thus (as 
shown above) literal registers and numbers can be used.

To prevent wasting space with long lines of blanks, there are several macro
processor calls according to string length:

wrtins10()
wrtins20()
wrtins30()
wrtins40()

Register allocation

pgen uses a dirt simple register allocation method. In first article, spills are
handled by pushing and poping registers to and from the stack in this version.
There are various optimizations to reduce this later.

The basic register allocation call is:

assreg(ep, frereg, r1, r2);

Where:

ep     - The expression tree to allocate.
frereg - A set of registers that are available for use.
r1     - The first register that will be used to deliver a result.
r2     - The second register for the result.

assreg() is applied recursively all the way down the expression tree, in left
first order. It uses a so-called "demand allocation" model. If the caller to 
assreg() needs to have the result in a given register or registers, it specifies
that in r1 and r2. Otherwise it passes rgnull. The subexpression always obeys a
demand if present, either arranging the result to end up in that register, or
making a copy of the result and moving it to that location after processing the
intermediate.

There are two sets of registers. The rdi,rsi,rdx,rcx,r8 and r9 registers are
resevered for the calling convention. The rax,rbx,rgr11-rgr15, and 
rgxmm0-rgxmm15 registers are used to hold temporaries, or for any other use.

The frereg set gives the registers that are free at any given node for use. Each
node can mark a register or registers in use, and then pass that set down. The
flow for this is for each node to mark its working results as in use, then
indicate via frereg what registers are in use for subexpressions. The frereg
set starts each terminal with rax,rbx,rgr11-rgr15, and rgxmm0-rgxmm15 in it, 
meaning these registers are available for use.

There are three methods used to allocate registers. The first is to request a
specific register or registers via assreg(). The second is to request a general
register by specifying rgnull via assreg(). The type of register allocated is
up to the node that fufills the allocation request, ie., floating point or 
integer. The third way is to get a general register via one of the allocation
calls.

For other situations, the following calls exist:

resreg() 	Reserves a specific register. This call dosen't allocate for a 
specific use, so it a general purpose reservation system. If a register will be
distroyed by an operation, then it will be reserved this way.

getreg()	Allocates a general register. This is used when any register will 
do.

getfreg()	Allocates a floating point register. Allocates from the rgxmm0 to
rgxmm15 set.

Allocation for terminal intermediates

Terminal intermediates work differently than expression operators or leaves.
Terminal intermediates "own" the register set, and thus do not need calls like
resreg(). They simply use registers as they see fit. Each expression tree is
processed, and the intermediate processor uses the register allocations of each
tree to generate code. The trees either have a register or registers that were
specifically set by the intermediate handler, or a general register. Whenever
possible, intermediate handlers will specify general registers instead of
specific registers to enable better code generation. There are two reasons
this might not be possible:

1. The operation may require specific registers. For example a set operation
might need the rdi or rsi regsiters on an AMD64 model to move or process the
set.

2. The code is preparing a system or user call, in which case the calling
convention dictates that operands be placed in a certain register.

Allocation for expression nodes or leaves

Each node handler for assreg() first arranges that its forks have the required
or general register or registers. This is "result directed", in that each
operator wants to steer the results to the registers requested by the caller,
if there are such. The register or registers requested are then placed in that
nodes r1 and r2 result registers. If the caller didn't specify a particular
result register, then the assreg() handler either specifies one or gets a free
register via one of the calls getreg() or getfreg(), for integer and float
registers, respectively.

If the result register for the operation being processed does not match the
requested result register, the handler is responsible for allocating a temporary
register, copying the result to that and then to the result, and allocating
the temporary register as required. In most cases, the arrangement of the result
to the proper result is not complex.

As mentioned above, the call resreg() is available within assreg() to mark a 
register as used or distroyed. If the register is not free, and is not one of
the r1 or r2 demand registers, it will be put into the "push" mask for the node.
What the push mask does is indicate to getexp() that the register must be pushed
at the start of encoding for the node, and restored after encoding for the node.
This protects the contents of higher nodes.

When assreg() receives a demand register, this is removed from the free set to
prevent it from being allocated. If the register is reserved, it won't be pushed
to save it if it is a demand register, since it will be written by definition.

Another catagory of register reservation are the temporary registers, t1 and t2.
These are allocated registers when a temporary register is needed, but it is not
a specific register.

Register allocation as a separate pass

The register allocation in pgen is designed to be decoupled from the generation
of code. That is, code generation does not rely on the method to allocate
registers, so a newer better register allocation could be inserted while still
keeping the main code generation. This allows for improvements (say register
coloring) without refactoring the most difficult part of code generation, the
actual end code generation.

To do this, expression entries are used to communicate what registers are to be
used in code generation. This is done both explicitly and implicitly. Explicit
register specification is done for the r1, r2 and t1 and t2 register 
specifications. Implicit register specifications are done when the operator uses
a specific register, such as during idiv or imul for the AMD64 series, which
requires rax and rdx registers. These registers are not specified, because they
are understood to be used during the operation.